---
title: "The grammar of interactive explanatory model analysis"
authors: "Hubert Baniecki, Dariusz Parzych, Przemyslaw Biecek"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2024-02-14-iema
hashtags: '<font color="#add8e6">#model-exploration</font> <font color="#90ee90">#Interactive-XAI</font>'
excerpt: 'This paper introduces Interactive Explanatory Model Analysis (IEMA), a framework that emphasizes the need for sequential, multi-method interpretation to address the limitations of isolated explanations in machine learning. By formalizing the grammar of IEMA and implementing it in a user-centered open-source tool, the authors demonstrate through user studies that combining diverse explanatory methods enhances human understanding, confidence, and decision-making accuracy.'
date: 2024-02-14
venue: 'Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery '
paperurl: 'https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10618-023-00924-w'
---

The growing need for in-depth analysis of predictive models leads to a series of new methods for explaining their local and global properties. Which of these methods is the best? It turns out that this is an ill-posed question. One cannot sufficiently explain a black-box machine learning model using a single method that gives only one perspective. Isolated explanations are prone to misunderstanding, leading to wrong or simplistic reasoning. This problem is known as the Rashomon effect and refers to diverse, even contradictory, interpretations of the same phenomenon. Surprisingly, most methods developed for explainable and responsible machine learning focus on a single-aspect of the model behavior. In contrast, we showcase the problem of explainability as an interactive and sequential analysis of a model. This paper proposes how different Explanatory Model Analysis (EMA) methods complement each other and discusses why it is essential to juxtapose them. The introduced process of Interactive EMA (IEMA) derives from the algorithmic side of explainable machine learning and aims to embrace ideas developed in cognitive sciences. We formalize the grammar of IEMA to describe human-model interaction. It is implemented in a widely used human-centered open-source software framework that adopts interactivity, customizability and automation as its main traits. We conduct a user study to evaluate the usefulness of IEMA, which indicates that an interactive sequential analysis of a model may increase the accuracy and confidence of human decision making.
