---
title: "A novel radiomics approach for predicting TACE outcomes in hepatocellular carcinoma patients using deep learning for multi-organ segmentation"
authors: "Krzysztof Bartnik, Mateusz Krzyziński, Tomasz Bartczak, Krzysztof Korzeniowski, Krzysztof Lamparski, Tadeusz Wróblewski, Michał Grąt, Wacław Hołówko, Katarzyna Mech, Joanna Lisowska, Magdalena Januszewicz, Przemysław Biecek"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2024-06-01-tace
hashtags: '<font color="purple">#Segmentation-XAI</font> <font color="blue">#BioMed</font>'
excerpt: 'This study introduces an automated radiomics-based machine learning approach for predicting transarterial chemoembolization (TACE) outcomes in hepatocellular carcinoma patients, using features from multiple organ volumes of interest (VOIs) extracted from pre-TACE CT scans. The method outperforms clinical models in predicting progression-free survival and highlights the prognostic value of non-tumoral VOIs, offering a scalable and radiologist-free alternative for treatment outcome prediction.'
date: 2024-06-01
venue: 'Scientific Reports'
paperurl: 'https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-024-65630-z'
---

Transarterial chemoembolization (TACE) represent the standard of therapy for non-operative hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), while prediction of long term treatment outcomes is a complex and multifactorial task. In this study, we present a novel machine learning approach utilizing radiomics features from multiple organ volumes of interest (VOIs) to predict TACE outcomes for 252 HCC patients. Unlike conventional radiomics models requiring laborious manual segmentation limited to tumoral regions, our approach captures information comprehensively across various VOIs using a fully automated, pretrained deep learning model applied to pre-TACE CT images. Evaluation of radiomics random survival forest models against clinical ones using Cox proportional hazard demonstrated comparable performance in predicting overall survival. However, radiomics outperformed clinical models in predicting progression-free survival. Explainable analysis highlighted the significance of non-tumoral VOI features, with their cumulative importance superior to features from the largest liver tumor. The proposed approach overcomes the limitations of manual VOI segmentation, requires no radiologist input and highlight the clinical relevance of features beyond tumor regions. Our findings suggest the potential of this radiomics models in predicting TACE outcomes, with possible implications for other clinical scenarios.

